All right, so let's have a discussion
on distinguishing class inheritance
from interface inheritance,
including abstract classes.
So because java only supports a class inheriting
from one parent class directly,
the inheritance tree looking
from the most specific class
to the least specific is in a straight line
up the tree, a direct path to the root.
A base class can have many branches,
but a branch has only one trunk
from which it's derived.
Java enforces rules through each derivative,
so there is no conflict or ambiguity
with inherited methods and fields.
We've already seen the implementing interfaces
can cause ambiguity and confusion
if you're inheriting a method
from your parent class that has the same signature
but a different return type from the interface
you might want to implement,
or if you're implementing multiple interfaces
with clashing methods.
Both types of inheritance support polymorphism,
allowing you to write code
for the most generic case possible,
but accepting any object typed
to the class or interface as long as the agreed-on
behaviour exists, which it must.
You can cast to a class type or an interface.
We've seen the the compiler's not as stringent
with its type checking when casting
to interface types, because unlike that direct look up
from the derived class to its outer most parent,
inheriting from interfaces may create an overlapping web
and the compiler can make no assumptions
about which classes might or might not
be implementing a particular interface
or be inheriting the interface behaviour
from a parent.
Interface inheritance alone will not get you very far.
Class inheritance can be used in an application
without ever implementing interface inheritance,
but your business entities may get cluttered
with behaviour that's not really specific
to their identity.
Your application code may require more
type checking and casting to force
certain functions to occur without interfaces,
or worse yet, your entity model may need to extend
from base classes that mean nothing as an identifier
but are there to facilitate a behaviour system wide.
We discussed both interfaces and abstract classes
in previous videos, but let's compare them here
side by side.
The following table describes the features and demonstrates
where these two constructs overlap.
You cannot instantiate an interface of this type.
That's true for an abstract class
and also true for an interface.
They may contain a mix of methods declared
with or without an implementation.
True for abstract class, true for an interface,
but with the interface any concrete method
must be private, default or static.
You can declare fields that are not
public, static and final.
This is true for an abstract class
and for an interface it's false
(all fields are automatically public, static,
and final whether you declare them that way or not.
Any other declaration will be a compiler error.)
You can define public, protected, package-private
or private concrete methods is true
for an abstract class.
It's false for an interface.
(Only private concrete methods are allowed.)
All other methods are public implicitly.
You can define public, protected,
or package-private abstract methods.
True for an abstract class.
False for an interface.
(All abstract methods are public implicitly.)
An abstract method must be declared abstract
is true for an abstract class
and for an interface, false
(it's implied if a method has no body).
And finally, you must declare the type abstract
if it contains an abstract method
is true for an abstract class,
but it's false for an interface.
(An interface is not declared abstract,
although you can do it.
It's just redundant since all methods
are implicitly abstract unless they are concrete.)
All right, so when would you use one
versus the other?
Well, generally speaking you create an interface
for a very limited set of system wide behaviour
without respect to any particular entity,
so that regardless of what the entity is,
it can execute behaviour, either reusable
or customizable, in a common way among all types.
You create an abstract class to fit
your entity model for a specific application,
abstracting a set of common behaviour
and attributes into some extensible reusable unit.
The abstract class makes sense logically
as a way to describe your entity's identity,
in other words to say that your entity
is a abstract something, and it lends itself
to reuse of both attributes and behaviour.
Each derivative class is then responsible
only for the additional functionality
and features that are particular
to its own specific type.
The derivative classes can focus
on what makes them different
if you've abstracted the common features and behaviour
into an inheritable unit.
All right, so comparing abstract classes
and interfaces, you want to abstract
and conceptualise a business entity.
Use an abstract class, yes.
You want to define attributes and behaviour
at an abstract level for a set
of classes that'll inherit the behaviour
and the state.
Yes again, to use an abstract class.
Your class requires access modifiers
other than public
(such as protected and private) for its members.
Yes, to use an abstract class there as well.
And next, your class requires non-static
or non-final fields to access and modify state.
Yes, to use an abstract class.
You're defining a behaviour that
disparate classes might share.
Yes, to use an interface there.
And finally, you wanna take advantage
of multiple inheritance of type.
Yes, to using an interface there.
All right, so let's end the video here
and in the next one, we'll swing over
to IntelliJ and start to go through
some of these concepts with code.
See you in the next video.